[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Like many ancient
civilizations,
the Maya appeared in Yucatan,
seemingly out of nowhere,
when a star in the Pleiades by
the same name was seen rising
before the sun around 3100 BC.
But a number of recent
underwater discoveries
tell a very different story.
Around the coast, mile
after mile of tunnels
reveal a world
submerged by rising seas
at the end of the Ice Age.
In these tunnels were found
human remains and Mayan
artifacts proving that a culture
was already established here
6,000 years earlier.
The name Maya means
"water people."
Perhaps it is a clue
to their true origin.
According to the sacred
book "Chilam Balam,"
the ancestors of
the Maya arrived
by boat in 9600 BC from a
large island to the east
called Atil or Atitlan, where
it is said the waters swallowed
the source of wisdom.
A catastrophe destroyed
their island home,
forcing its divine
survivors to sail west.
The "Chilam Balam" refers
to these first inhabitants
as Kanuul, the people
of the serpent.
They were led by three God
men: Kukulkan, Quetzalcoatl,
and Itzamna, each of
whom led seven sages all
charged with the
rebuilding of civilization.
When they arrived
in Yucatan, they
called it Mayab, "the
land of the few,"
probably in honor of the
survivors who found themselves
here.
It is said that
Itzamna and his crew
brought the understanding of
mathematics and the stars,
of jade carving,
agriculture, architecture,
and sacred knowledge,
thus explaining
how the Maya appeared with
a pre-packaged civilization
and a fully developed cosmology.
What's more astonishing is
that hardly anyone has ever
heard of Itzamna and his
sages the Itz, the water
wizards, people who
came from the sea
with knowledge of the laws of
nature and how to bend them.
This is their story, how their
progeny became known as Maya,
and how the temples of
Yucatan and Guatemala
today are the final
expression of a project 9,000
years in the making.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Maya were under no
illusion that Itzamna,
along with his
counterpart Quetzalcoatl,
was a real person, because
he is unambiguously
described as "a fair
and ruddy complexioned
man with a long beard, a
white man with strong body,
broad forehead,
large eyes who came
from across the ocean in
a boat that moved itself
without paddles."
The cult of Itzamna was based
on nonviolence, compassion,
and humility.
It was such a cornerstone
of Maya cosmology
that the image of these
gods riding a canoe
was still used in ceremonial
art up until the historic era.
Collectively known
as the paddler gods,
they were sometimes represented
as zoomorphic figures riding
a canoe that sailed along
the Milky Way towards Orion,
which itself was considered
the origin of the gods,
not to mention the hearth
of creation itself.
After arriving in Yucatan,
Itzamna and his water wizards
established a town that still
bears their name, Izamal.
While visitors flock to
more popular locations,
few are aware that
the largest pyramid
in this corner of Central
America is found here.
Even though mostly destroyed
and used as a quarry
by incoming Spanish
Catholic priests,
the scale of the Sun
pyramid is still impressive.
Walking up, it is possible
to see the exposed
megalithic core.
Nine levels once
spread over two acres,
followed by a curved mound
of a further nine levels.
According to folklore, the
head of Itzamna is buried here.
But there's a lot
more to Izamal.
Among its gardens
and plazas, light
hints of its past grandeur.
A vast temple city
that once comprised
seven pyramids and temples
covering 20 square miles.
Six raised sacred
roads, or sacbe,
linked Izamal to other
Maya cult centers,
making this a focal
point of Yucatan.
In the western section of what
used to be the central plaza
lies a second
impressive pyramid,
Itzamatul, claimed to be the
resting place of Itzamna's
heart.
When the explorer
Arthur Catherwood
came across a third
pyramid in 1915,
he noted how it was still
covered with stucco masks
and elaborate symbols along with
the 7-foot-tall head of Itzamna
himself.
The southern section
was once marked
by another colossal
structure, Pop-Hol-Chac.
Faced with the superhuman
task of destroying the largest
temple complex in Yucatan,
the arriving Spaniards
simply leveled the pyramid
and used its masonry
to build a Franciscan
monastery and other buildings.
Part of its original
stonework can still
be seen throughout
the monastery.
The fact that the Spanish
made this the most important
of Catholic bishoprics as well
as the center of pilgrimage
reveals the importance of
Itzamna's teachings, his temple
city, and why both had to
be convincingly subjugated.
But in doing so, they
left a major clue
as to the origin of Izamal.
As a rule, Catholic churches
must face east-west.
Whenever they deviate,
it is a sure sign
they conceal an
original structure.
Here, the Franciscan
church sits above a cenote,
a Maya ceremonial cave over
which the original site was
built. Since ancient
temples memorialize
their date of
construction by facing
the rising of a particular star,
the church's unusual alignment
gives away the date
of the temple--
the winter solstice in
9600 BC, the very date
given in Maya texts
for the arrival
of Itzamna and his magicians.
In the west of the
Yucatan Peninsula
lies another major
temple complex,
Itzna, the House of Itza,
today known as Edzna.
Enormous structures
and staircases
frame a central
courtyard, marking
the arrival of two sacbe.
One links to the Gulf of Mexico
and continues under the sea,
demonstrating the truly ancient
foundation of this empire.
A huge elevated structure
with broad central stairway
forms a dramatic entrance
to the Grand Plaza,
a restricted section for
those who observed the rules
and customs of sacred space.
The Plaza served
as a focal point
for honoring the
traditions established
by the Itz and the
Maya, with festivities
held to coincide with
specific stellar events,
such as the solar return
of Venus every 52 years.
The divine bloodline of
the Itz continued here
until the seventh century,
with Lady Jut Chanek.
Her title, Serpent
Star, identifies her
as a progenitor of
the original Kanuul,
the people of the serpent.
Towering over the plaza
is a five-step pyramid.
Its 40 degree elevation reflects
the angle of the nonagon,
the nine-sided geometric figure
symbolizing utmost perfection.
The building was designed
to serve as an academy
where teachings concerned with
enlightenment were conducted,
each chamber dedicated
to individual topics.
Maya glyphs set into the
staircase remind initiates
of their responsibilities.
Among other buildings
is the Temple of Masks.
It features the sun god Ahau,
whose face is illuminated
by the sun in May
and August, marking
the festivals of fertility and
harvest, known to the Celts
as Beltane and Lammas.
Ahau is an unusual
Maya name because it
is the nickname given to
the flood gods of Egypt,
the shining ones,
followers of Horus,
demonstrating how two
distinct cultures once shared
a common point of origin.
Despite the impressive
temple culture of the Maya,
their sacred rituals
begin elsewhere.
Yucatan is filled
with cenotes, created
from the impact
of meteorites that
took its rivers under ground.
Practically all pyramids
were built over a cenote,
illustrating how the
womb of the feminine
supports the phallic
masculine temple above it.
Every teaching, every
ritual starts with ceremony
inside the ritual cave.
The Maya spatial model
was organized horizontally
by the cardinal directions,
representing the material
world, and vertically by three
tiers, a creative underworld
housing the forces of creation,
a middle world represented
by the temple, and an
upper world, the sky.
At the core is the
cosmic hearth, the Orion
constellation, so much so
that the symbol of Orion
is even painted on the roof
of the ceremonial cave.
The other world of the
Maya is called Xibalba.
And one of its most
important places of access
is the sacred cave Balankanche.
Perhaps this cave system was
chosen above 1,000 others
because its layout so resembles
a uterus, one figuratively
engages with a divine womb.
At the bottom of the
subterranean world
lies a waterway representing
the River of Forgetfulness,
the stream every initiate must
cross to reach the other world.
In the main chamber, a
tall limestone column
rises like the world tree
connecting the lower, middle,
and upper worlds, the
umbilical cord that
takes the soul on its journey
along the celestial river.
This tree is Wacah Chan,
meaning "raised-up sky."
Scattered among its roots lie
incense burners and containers
for the narcotic
used by initiates
to elicit a near-death
experience whereby the soul
temporarily leaves the body.
The traditional concoction
is called balché,
a fermented honey drink brewed
inside a canoe hollowed from
a sacred tree, the vessel to
take the soul to the heart
of the sky.
In Egyptian tradition,
a similar celestial boat
was used by its famous
initiate Osiris,
the earthly
representative of Orion.
The ritual that took
place inside Balankanche
is memorialized in
the local legend
of a boy who was forbidden
to marry his beloved.
So he ran away with
his intended bride
and hid her in the cave,
hence the nickname Xtakumbil,
"the hidden lady."
But there's a hidden
meaning to this story.
Every initiate who undertook
the journey to the other world,
did so to discover the
source of wisdom, which
was embodied in a divine woman.
If the initiate
returned successfully
from this out-of-body journey,
they married the cosmic bride.
Even in a state of
ruin, the temple cities
originally constructed by the
Itz and expanded by the Maya
were beautiful.
Every building was encoded
with the vocabulary
of sacred knowledge
by people within
an unerring understanding
of universal laws,
producing a logical and
harmonious conceptualization
of the universe.
And Uxmal is a perfect example.
Uxmal means "built three times."
And indeed, the site as a whole
follows three distinct axes,
each defining a period
of thousands of years
before the stars
moved and new temples
realigned to mirror the sky.
The original site is
described as an invisible city
with the distinction of
having been built in one night
by the magic of a dwarf king.
Sacbes link Uxmal
with Chichen Itza
on the other side of
Yucatan and hundreds
of miles further with
Xunantunich in Belize and Tikal
in Guatemala.
One such road arrives at
the main quadrangle of Uxmal
where it aligns with Venus
through an entrance arch.
The arch defines a
type of activity taking
place inside the courtyard.
With a pitch of 52 degrees,
the angle of the Great Pyramid
of Giza, the buildings
lining the courtyard
are concerned with the
transformation of the soul.
This area once served
as a cosmic university
where priestess
Ix Kukulkan, "she
who teaches the path
of wisdom," transmitted
knowledge to astronomers,
architects, artists,
and scribes, many of whom
traveled across Central America
to receive the
knowledge of the gods.
There was a focus
on the application
of integrative medicine,
so healers were also
made their way here.
At the center of
the courtyard once
stood the hearth of
the temple complex
where stood three
stones commemorating
the belt stars of Orion in
honor of the original teachers.
X's marked the faces
of the buildings,
defining them as
restricted spaces.
There are exactly 584
X's the cycle of Venus,
the Maya symbol of rebirth.
It seems one came
here to be reborn.
The lower building is called
Itzamna, the shaman house.
Its cardinal
position in the south
defines it as a place
where the element of fire
is lit within the
initiate so they
come into their personal power.
Along the upper
molding are flowers
called itz, the magic substance,
indicating a place where
narcotics were studied and
probably ingested as part
of the initiatory process.
Above each doorway,
a stone window
complete with a
zoomorphic creature
represents the
transformational cycle
of birth, death, and rebirth.
This can only be possible when
the individual experiences
the paradisial world
while they live.
Interestingly, this name of
this window into another reality
is Xanil nah, which is
uncannily similar to "Jannah,"
the window into paradise
in Persian mysticism.
For the journey to be
accomplished successfully,
the initiate must enter
in a balanced state.
So eight chambers
reflect the teachings
of the four material and
four spiritual forces
with the ninth, the
entrance defining
the stage of completion.
In this building initiates
began and finished
their inner journey.
Across the way is Nikte'il
Nah, the assembly house.
Located in the north, the
temple concerns itself
with understanding the laws
of magnetism and gravity
that allow the soul passage
through the field of reeds
leading to Xibalba, hence
why a house of reeds
appears above each room.
These are canna,
serpent houses, where
one comes to work with a
serpentine flow of energy.
11 chambers plus
two side chambers
make 11 over 13, the
solar and lunar numbers,
the mark of the
masculine and feminine
intertwined in harmony.
Scrolls spreading across
the face of the building
indicate clouds, emphasizing
the ascent to the sky.
But the prominent feature
is the mask of Chaac.
The ring eyes of a young
person cover an old face.
The old ego comes
here to die to be
reborn with a new and younger
way of looking at the world.
Members of the
Chaac society walk
in the footsteps of the
divine lineage of the Kanuul.
We're reminded of this in
the effigies of Itzamna
who is depicted with his
breath extending from his mouth
from which came the
knowledge taught here.
In the direction
of the rising sun,
the east house is concerned
with healing and rebirth.
Epitomized by the
pentagram, the building
comes with five chambers.
Its flowers identify the blessed
substance, the application
of plant medicine which included
narcotics for shamanic travel.
The Itz magicians
themselves are depicted
with their tongues
extended like the green man
from whose breath nature is
periodically rejuvenated.
When the sun descends,
it marks the journey
into the other world.
So in the west
house, one becomes
fully aware of the
laws of nature,
which in sacred
teachings are symbolized
by the seven colors of light
and the seven notes of the music
scale.
These laws were once taught in
each of these seven chambers.
Cloud and lattice motifs
indicate a cloud house,
a place from where one
travels to another reality
and hopefully
returns transformed,
like the initiate emerging
from the mouth of a snake.
Not only has he
been indoctrinated
into the teachings of the
people of the serpent,
he no longer associates
with the soil
alone but rises like a bird
above the material world
and sees the bigger picture.
The individual has become a
feathered serpent, the path
once taken by Quetzalcoatl.
Across the way, a massive
artificial platform
rises above Uxmal and
supports a group of buildings.
The main one forms a huge
rectangle in the ratio
eight to one, a triple
octave in music.
It is covered with no less
than 20,000 sculptures.
Images of the rain
god Chaac suggest
this may have been erected when
the regional weather changed
radically to a dryer
climate around 2500 BC.
Each mask is assembled from
exactly 19 limestone blocks,
reflecting the 18.6
year cycle when
the lunar and solar
calendars synchronize.
Doorways conform to
the ratio of the octave
and the golden ratio.
Above the central
chamber, a large emblem
of a feathered Itzamna
is supported by seven Itz
in the form of serpents.
Nothing in these
buildings is by chance.
Everything conveys a
piece of information,
like a book made of stone.
Two spear archers link the
building's three elements.
The first is curiously angled
at 19.5 degrees, the angle
of energy upwelling, reflecting
in the latitude where
the most energetically active
spot manifests on a planet.
On Earth, it is
Mauna Kea volcano.
The other spear door is
angled at 33 degrees.
It reflects the
most secret teaching
of the mysteries, the conscious
manipulation of gravity,
which on Earth brings materials
to rest at the angle of 32.72
degrees, or 33 for convenience.
Even sculptures are functional.
In the adjacent
courtyard, a dual jaguar
is aligned to the
central door to mark
the sudden rising of Venus
over hills three miles away.
But there's more to it.
Such sculptures were cut from
magnetically charged stone
and induce specific effects.
Here, a person
facing one jaguar is
able to transmit
a thought or image
to a person facing the other.
How life appeared on earth
and who taught it to humans
was a focus of the
House of Turtles,
so-called because
of a line of turtles
crawling around its perimeter.
In Maya cosmology,
Orion is a cosmic turtle
whose back was cracked
by lightning, allowing
the god of maize to
rise through the crack
and fertilize the Earth.
From the House of Turtles
the Pyramid of the Magician
rises above the canopy of trees.
It's an elegant structure,
conceding a long, long history.
Like all temples, it
has grown organically
to reflect the ages and
the movement of the sky
across long periods of time.
The present building
incorporates four older
temples.
At a foot of its western face
is a restricted courtyard
that once saw its
share of ceremonies.
The phallic stone pillar
marks the crossing
of telluric currents.
It is the spot where offerings
and prayers were made
and where one prepared mentally
before approaching the pyramid.
Effigies of Chaac line
the steep staircase.
They lead to a room into which
the light of the descending
equinox sun is swallowed by the
massive mouth of the pyramid's
protective monster.
By contrast, the
eastern side is covered
by a wide staircase leading
to the portal of an older
structure.
Like a womb, it received the
light of the rising equinox
sun, now slightly offset
due to the gradual movement
of the sky.
The correct alignment
took place in 7000 BC.
The equinox sun is a highly
celebrated time of year,
since it marks the moment
when light and dark are
in perfect equilibrium,
thus it reflects the ideal
of a balanced society.
This ideal was not only marked
by pyramids and temples,
it was also calculated to
influence the entire Yucatan
Peninsula.
On the east coast,
the Temple of Tulum
marks the entry point of
the rising equinox sun.
Its setting on the west coast is
marked on the island of Jaina.
The island represents
the descent into Xibalba,
so not surprisingly,
over 20,000 Maya
came to be buried here along
with their totem figurines.
Coincidentally, ajain is a
Persian term for a spirit
and it defines Jainism,
one of the most
ancient religious
traditions of India
which teaches a path
to spiritual purity
and enlightenment through
nonviolence, ethics that
are oddly identical
to those introduced
in Yucatan by Itzamna
over 11,000 years ago.
Were all these people borrowing
from the same instruction
manual?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The central aim of the teachings
of Itzamna and Quetzalcoatl
sought nothing less than
spiritual transfiguration.
This was achieved
through mental tests
and an aesthetic lifestyle
aimed at removing oneself
from physical attachments,
a flaying of the self,
so to speak, so that
this precious stone
and rich feather, as the
Maya refer to the soul,
could access a finer
level of being.
The process required
the initiative
to undergo a symbolic
death and rebirth,
just as Quetzalcoatl
and Kukulkan once
did for four days inside a
stone box, after which they
arose and appeared as bright
as the morning star Venus.
The Maya associated
spiritual teachings
with three stellar objects--
Sirius, Orion, and Pleiades.
They refer to them as
suns, which brings us
to the temple
complex of Oxkintok
meaning "where the
three suns burn."
Its most inconspicuous yet most
important building is Satunsat.
Writing about it, a
visiting Spanish priest
misunderstood its purpose.
The quote-- "It is
a place where they
tossed those who committed
great offenses so there
they may die."
He believed this to be
a jail when, in fact, it
is a labyrinth.
The entrance marks the equinox
sunset, the entry into Xibalba.
A low ceiling forces a
person to bend in humility
and into a dark maze.
Turning left takes
you to a dead end.
Turning right also takes you to
a wall, but with a difference.
The ceiling slab
pivots, allowing entry
into a second level.
The process is repeated into a
third and progressively taller
level.
Walking the maze simulates
the disoriented soul
in the other world
which one can only
navigate by using the intuitive
or right side of the brain.
Upon ascending the three
levels, the initiate
finally reappears to face
Venus at the equinox sunrise.
In the world of Maya,
there is physical death
and there's metaphoric
death, a concept clearly lost
on that priest.
A sacbe from the
temple city of Tikal
takes you to Labna, a
journey of 200 miles.
A visitor in 1840
would have been
greeted by the
ruined observatory
on its artificial hill that
featured a monolithic statue
of Itzamna's consort Ix Chel.
There's an Asian feel
to the architecture
here, as though one is
in a Cambodian temple.
And indeed there was
much cultural exchange
between Asian
cultures and the Maya.
The entrance arch marks
the end of the second sacbe
and commemorates
the original site
which aligns to the
rising of Sirius
on the winter
solstice in 6000 BC.
Inside the courtyard,
two xanil nah
define this as another place
of access into Xibalba.
The beehive-shaped
arch indicates
one came here to collect
the metaphoric honey,
the very knowledge of the gods,
which is why deities are always
associated with this substance.
A close look at the foundations
of Labna's sacred buildings
reveal images of [NON-ENGLISH],,
nature gods whose purpose is
to provide protection
to sacred abodes.
Protruding from one temple, the
sculpture of a risen Kukulkan
emerges from the
mouth of a serpent.
An arch at the
temple city of Kabah
marks the arrival of a royal
road from the arch at Uxmal,
11.060606 miles away,
the exact numerical value
of the sunspot cycle in years.
In one corner of the
complex, a pyramid
still awaits excavation.
Kabah is an odd word
in Yucatan because it
is the name of the Egyptian
esoteric soul body teaching
Kaaba, better known by
its full title Kabbalah.
As a complex, Kabah
represents the strong hand
of the creator, Ahau, the
nickname of the Egyptian sages.
Indeed, Egyptian and Maya
languages share many words.
The central feature is
the temple Codz Poop,
whose walls calculate
2,000 years of conjunction
cycles between Earth and Venus.
Venus was central
to Maya cosmology
because it was a
transitional marker
from one age to the next.
It also calculates a 260
day calendar or nine cycles
of the moon, the celestial
body that regulates
the human gestation cycle.
Each day is represented by a
mask of the rain god Chaac.
Nearby, two Itz magicians
watch over the site
like protective sentinels.
Probably the best known
Maya text is to Popol Vuh.
It tells how four
prophets and their wives
descended from the
Pleiades to share
the mysteries of
hidden knowledge
at the temple
complex of Ek Balam.
The name means "jaguar star."
Like so many temple
complexes, Ek Balam
has been rebuilt and expanded
over a long period of time--
a nucleus comprising
twin temples,
an observational tower,
and a small ball court
form a newer group
dated to 1300 BC,
while a huge platform
featuring larger masonry
sits on the site commemorating
a far more distant era.
An entrance arch on a
platform designed according
to the golden ratio
marks the crossing
of two sacbe along
cardinal points.
The remains of
sweat lodges testify
to shamanic work
that took place here,
possibly in
preparation to access
the most prominent structure.
100 foot high, this series
of rectangular platforms
form a kind of step pyramid.
One by one, its chambers
are being excavated,
revealing a litany
of stucco figures
and over 40 sacred texts in
a good state of preservation.
One of the rooms is still
electromagnetically active
and shuts down electrical
devices whenever
they pass beyond its threshold.
The imposing staircase and
exterior of the building
are juxtaposed at different
angles to the structure
beneath demonstrating how
the sky changed by the time
the new ruler
remodeled the site,
as he describes on a stela
at the base of the building.
The double serpent identifies
his Kanuul heritage.
Pyramid-type
buildings represents
witz, the sacred mound upon
which the knowledge of the gods
was originally deposited.
Here, the most elaborate
chamber is the Jaguar Room.
It is shaped like
the mouth of a witz
monster, the protective beast
of the sacred mountain whose
33 teeth serve to metaphorically
deflesh the initiate
so as to lighten the physical
body before undertaking
the journey into Xibalba.
Seven Itz teachers hover
around the entrance,
some depicted with symbolic
wings, the teachers of the sky.
They are referred to as
angel, a being of creation.
One Itz is shown with fingers
in an Indian mudra position.
One sits in a yoga pose,
while another demonstrates
the jaguar grip, the jaguar
being the guide into Xibalba.
The images around the
entrance depict the sky world,
the chamber is the middle
world, and below the platform
the lower world, with
its rivers and currents
of creation and its
protective nature spirits.
Adjacent to the chamber
is the reading room.
Above the entrance, a reed
house in the shape of a T
represents tau,
the breath of God
from where the most
profound knowledge emerges,
leaving little doubt as
to the kind of material
that was read in this chamber.
Such visual clues
identify this area
where the candidate
was taught the deeper
mysteries, after
which they undertook
an out-of-body journey to
gain firsthand experience.
Ek Balam was
clearly a site where
restricted knowledge about the
forces of nature was conveyed,
information that in the
wrong hands could be used
and misused.
No wonder the Maya carefully
concealed the site with rubble
until it resembled
a natural hill,
fooling the invading Spanish
who simply walked past,
oblivious to its importance.
In its heyday, the
ancient city of Mayapan
was the place that united the
wisdom teachings of other sites
throughout the Yucatan.
Itzamna's counterpart
Kukulkan once
lived here, teaching the
structure of the cosmos
and the art of uniting the
three forces of creation.
Like every other
flood god, he too
was supported by seven
sages, one of whom
was his wife and sister.
It's often been debated
how the Maya were
able to maintain a
population large enough
to build and
maintain the largest
civilization in the Americas.
The answer is they designed
their step pyramids
in such a way as to
allow electromagnetism
to rise to the top platform
upon which seeds were placed.
The buildup of
electrical current
fertilized the seeds, allowing
for as many as five harvests
during the growing season.
One of these telluric currents
is still active today.
It flows along the
row of stone pillars
before impregnating the pyramid.
There is also an
obligatory observatory
where complex Maya calendars
were studied and implemented.
There was a long count
calendar spanning
26,000 years and the Great
Cycle spanning 2,160 years.
Others tracked the motions of
Mercury, Mars, and Jupiter,
along with eclipse cycles.
There was a 266-day
female gestation calendar,
a general 365-day
solar calendar,
a supplemental 819-day count,
and a 584-day Venus transit
that calibrates with
the earth and sun.
Such calculations could
only be the product
of a culture that
observed, calculated,
and marked these transits over
tens of thousands of years.
In other words,
the calendars were
inherited from an
earlier civilization
and expanded upon by the Maya.
At the entrance to the
town of Chichen Itza,
an old church sits on the
site of a pyramid in which
was found a 10-foot-tall
human skeleton,
a good omen for the cultural
roots of this enormous temple
city.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Over 2,000 temples and pyramids
interpret the universe,
acting as focal points for human
interaction with the divine.
It is a cosmic university
to which candidates flocked
from all over Central America
to be educated to the highest
levels of mathematics,
astrology, astronomy, science,
philosophy, and the mysteries.
Each discipline shared in
the individual temples which
embody the teachings by
mere virtue of measures
and decorations hardwired into
the fabric of the buildings.
Chichen Itza means "mouth or
well of the water wizard."
As the name implies,
it was founded
by Itzamna and his crew.
And ever since, people
have been coming here
in search of enlightenment.
Its supplemental
title Uucyabnal,
the seven great house, honors
the seven Itz as well as
the star cluster most
associated with great teachers,
the Pleiades.
On the summit of the
Temple of the Tables,
there once stood a series of
altars supported by 19 figures
called atlantes, a reminder from
where the knowledge originated.
One building features an
elaborate mask representing
Itzamna and his divine breath.
Beehives mark this
restricted abode
as a place where symbolic
honey was dispensed to adepts.
The adjacent building
is a mask in itself,
covered with images of
Itzamna and of Choc,
the old face overlaid with
a young person's eyes,
indicating teachings that
focused on personal renewal.
Above the entrance, a
man seated in meditation
is clothed below
the waist and naked
above because in the lower
world, things are hidden,
whereas in the world above,
everything is laid bare.
He is a resurrected
hero originally painted
blue just like other
rejuvenating heroes Shiva
and Osiris.
At Chichen Itza,
the understanding
of the sky and a person's place
in the cosmic scheme of things
was paramount.
A large observatory
with a spiral staircase
stands on a platform
in the ratio 4 to 3,
the orbital proportion
between Earth and Venus.
The round structure
is oddly placed
on the platform, suggesting
a later adaptation
to a constantly changing sky.
The corners aligned to solstices
and carefully placed windows
marked astronomical events.
The cycles of the moon, Venus,
Sirius, Orion, and Pleiades
were calculated here.
One of the main
functions of Chichen Itza
involves the Rite of
Initiation and it took place
at three interconnected sites.
The first is a temple of
the jaguar, a small room
by the main ball court.
It is presided by an
eroded image of Itzamna
as a wizened old man with
Caucasian features and a beard.
Protected by a feather
serpent on each column,
the room is in the proportion
of the golden ratio.
A weathered panel depicts a
ceremonial dance once enacted
over five days around
November the first
presided by an Itz
magician who works the life
force while a group of
participants walks behind him.
A panel depicts a
kind of battle scene
where the soul overcomes
the physical world,
while mountains and
crevices emit the life force
in the form of serpents who
support the nature gods.
The feathered serpent
serves the entourage
and protects a magician holding
a mirror that enables him
to see into the other world.
The chamber is aligned to the
winter solstice in 5500 BC.
Having been advised on
the mysteries of life,
the individual was then
led to the second location,
a small pyramid that few
take much interest in.
Built over a cenote, it is
constructed with seven tiers,
marking it as a
place where one comes
to interact with the
formative laws of nature.
Stairways decorated with
intertwined serpents
representing electrical and
magnetic currents feature
eyes inside each
coil, a reminder that
harnessing these forces
allows one to peer
into other levels of reality.
Once prepared, the
individual entered
from the cave underneath, made
their way into the pyramid
by way of an umbilical
shaft, and spent
a few days inside the
womb-like environment.
Upon returning
from their journey,
they climbed up another shaft
to reappear on the summit.
To complete the
initiation, the initiate
would be taken to
the third location
opposite the first
temple of the jaguar.
A large step mound called
Temple of the Warriors.
At the top of the
grand staircase,
they would gaze at the
seated figure of Chac Mool
at the same moment Venus rose
before the equinox sunrise
and appeared above the
plate on his belly.
Together, the three
sites form a triptych
in the form of a perfect
right angled triangle.
Historians have led us to
believe that a gruesome blood
sport was conducted
in Maya ball courts--
or was it?
To begin with, the
playing area is
composed of two inverted
Ts, representing
Tau, the breath of God.
And access is via a
staircase whose balustrades
are carved with wacah chan, the
world tree linking the three
levels of reality, upon which
is perched the bird Itzam Yeh,
representing the elevated soul.
And if the arena was meant for
a public sporting activity,
there is a remarkable absence
of seating for spectators.
Clearly, a better
explanation is in order.
The steep walls of the court
illustrate Maya cosmology
of how life emerged from a crack
in the mouth of creation, hence
why the ball court is
referred to as hom, a crevice.
The court itself is
acoustically tuned.
A vocal sound or a clap of hands
echoes exactly seven times,
an homage to sound as a
causative element in creation.
High up on the inner
walls, stone rings
are carved with intertwined
feathered serpents.
Eyes fill the gaps
between the coils so
that when the ball
penetrated the ring,
it became the object with
which to see into Xibalba,
hence the nickname by which
the ball court was known
Tlach-tli, the looking place.
So far it seems the
purpose of the game
was one of instructive
or spiritual value.
But the most telling clues are
the intricately carved panels
running the length of the court
in which players are depicted
in a most unusual game.
The central player has no head
and seven wriggling snakes
rise out of his severed neck.
Each represent a
law of creation.
But to embody this
knowledge, the player
must first decapitate his ego,
depicted at the player's feet
as a large skull inside a halo.
It is called way, the soul.
Altogether, this
portion of the panel
depicts an initiate on his path
to wisdom supported either side
by the seven sages.
The entire scene depicts
a cylindrical projection
of the planes around the Zodiac,
tracing a path of planets
above and below the
celestial horizon.
In other words, the
game played here
was a figurative ball
game of the gods.
The idea of the game was
to amass enough points
to reach the center of
the field, teocalli.
The aim was for players
to learn and interact
with the laws of
nature and learn
the greatest game of all--
the game of life.
The ball game was a metaphor
of the regenerative cycle
of creation.
And the person who
understood its mechanics
overcame the repetitive
cycle of fate.
Thus it was a game
of symbolic warfare.
All in all, the ball
court enabled people
to visualize the mechanics
of a spiritual drama
and how to embody them.
And it is encapsulated in
the upper temple overlooking
the court where a large mural
depicts a metaphoric scene--
the battle between the laws
of nature and the incarnated
itself.
Like all things, the loss of
the original meaning over time
led to misunderstanding
and the game
degenerated into a literal
game of life and death
in northern Mexico, which
the Aztec reenacted each year
with gruesome barbarity.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The dominant feature
of Chichen Itza
is undoubtedly the
pyramid of Kukulkan
a masterpiece of
geodetic, numeric,
and astronomical information.
The floor of the plaza from
which it rises was once painted
in red cinnabar and forms the
top of several underground
levels, built by the
original astronomer priest
[NON-ENGLISH].
There may be as many as
nine underground levels
to reflect the Maya underworld.
All of this, too, was
built above a cenote
and originally accessed
by canoe using a network
of underground waterways.
The pyramids general
slope of 52 degrees
is the same as the
Great Pyramid of Giza.
Its terrace walls
slanted 72 degrees,
the route number to calculate
the earth's procession
and the houses of the Zodiac.
Each large step
features 52 panels,
the cycle of the Pleiades,
which equals one Maya century.
Stairways inclined at
45 degrees represent
the square, the material world.
And four staircases
of 91 steps equal 364,
with the top platform
making 365, the solar year.
The pyramid's shape tracks
the equinoxes, solstices,
and the zenith of the sun.
At the equinox sunrise,
the pyramid's shadow
forms the head and wings of
a quetzal bird on the ground,
while the clap of hands
imitates the bird's sound.
At sunset, the
light casts shadows
in seven isosceles triangles
against the Western balustrade
that evoke a wriggling serpent.
And by contrast, the
winter solstice sunset
projects a serpent descending
into and fertilizing the earth.
Strategically situated
on the seventh course,
the inner chamber of
the pyramid is referred
to as the Chamber of Alchemy.
Painted in red cinnabar and
decorated with 72 jade spots,
the jaguar throne represents the
bridge between the two worlds.
In an induced catatonic
state, the initiate
would leave the body and enter
the dwelling place of the gods.
The ideal of the Maya was
the overcoming of gravity
and the ascent of the soul.
The more an individual worked
with the concepts embodied
in this building, the more they
became aligned to cosmic order
and the more likely they return
transformed and enlightened
as an Aku, an illuminated one.
The risen initiate was then
draped with a leopard skin,
just as in ancient Egypt, where
Osiris himself was depicted
as a crouching
leopard, and the priest
of Amenti who served his
ideals wore leopard skin.
According to the Maya, the
temple tradition of Yucatan
is a continuation
of Atitlan in what
is described as the
rebuilding of the former world
of the gods.
Just how old the
lineage of the Itz
might have been is revealed in
the Maya serpent dynasty that
covers 16,000 years
and most likely
originated in Atitlan
until a catastrophe
at the end of the Ice Age forced
them to resettle in Yucatan.
Whatever happened to these
sages of whom the Maya wrote
were endowed with intelligence?
They saw and instantly
they could see far.
They succeeded in knowing all
that there is in the world.
The things hidden
in the distance
they saw without
first having to move.
Great was their wisdom.
Their sight reached to the
forests, the rocks, the lakes,
the seas, the mountains
and the valleys.
In truth, they
were admirable men.
They were able to know all.
And they examined
the four corners,
the four points of
the arch of the sky,
and the round face of the Earth.
Under various names,
the Itz migrated
into the interior and the
highlands of Guatemala,
settling on an island in a lake
named after their sunken island
home, Atitlan.
Here, they built a city
called Utatlan, a replica
of the one they'd lost.
Ironically, the
island also sank,
leaving the Itz to rebuild
Utatlan on the lake shore.
Another of their island cities--
Nojpeten, on the lake that still
bears their name Peten Itza.
Here, the Itz erected
no less than 21 temples
and a nine-step pyramid.
There's no trace of
the buildings today,
all destroyed by
the Spanish, who
used the temples as a
quarry for their own homes,
then renamed the island Flores.
But the main church,
misaligned to the southeast,
marks the spot where
the pyramid once
stood, aligned to the
winter solstice in 7600 BC,
2,000 years after
the Itz first landed
on the coast of the Yucatan to
establish one of the greatest
civilizations ever
seen, much of it yet
to be reclaimed from the jungle.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Beside a crocodile
infested river,
Yaxchilan is the city
of the first prophets.
Maya tradition speaks of
rituals conducted here
that allowed initiates to
travel through time and space
and return with
specialized information.
They were referred to as
Architects of the Sky.
Versed in the
mysteries, teachers
such as Itzamnaaj Balam
II and Lady Sak B'iyaan
journeyed to parallel universes.
And the knowledge they
gained there was recorded
on lintels throughout the site.
One complex slowly being
rescued from the jungle
is Baak, the House of
the Infinite Serpent,
a Maya ceremonial center
filled with sacred architecture
and possessing one of the
highest spiritual frequencies.
It was later named Palenque.
The figures responsible
for its renaissance
in the seventh century were
the ruler K'inich Pacal
and his priestesses.
Their ancient teachings taught
the path to self-realization
that led to the highest
grade of Maya master--
Iq, "the breath of the
gods, the breath of life."
Graphically, it took
the form of a T,
the cross to which high
initiate have been symbolically
attached to throughout
history, long,
long before the advent
of Christianity.
The Maya defined
the physical world
as a manifestation of the
spiritual and the spiritual
as the essence of the material.
The two were
inextricably linked.
Action and interaction
with other world beings
influences the
fate of the world.
The opposite is also true and
the Maya exploited patterns
of energy in time and
space using ritual
to control the
forces they released.
Hence, rulers
functioned as shamans
operating in both
dimensions and maintaining
a balance between the two by
the application of ritual.
The main step
pyramid in Palenque
stands at the foot of
the sacred mountain
on the west side of
the river, the Cardinal
direction of Xibalba.
It faces the rising of
Venus at the equinox,
the mark of the
enlightened initiate
who transitions from
ignorance to awareness.
At this time, in
3100 BC, Draco also
appeared vertically above
it, at once commemorating
the people of the serpent
as well as the beginning
of the age when the
people began referring
to themselves as Maya.
Nine stages rise at
40 degrees, the angle
of the nonagon, geometry
of utmost perfection,
offering a hint as to the level
of teaching performed here.
The ratio of its foundation is
equal to the note F, the summit
temple and its doors
the note E. It seems
the building is a music box.
It is referred to as the
Temple of Inscriptions,
after an extensive hieroglyphic
panel describing Pacal's period
ending rituals.
The inner chambers were
used for restricted ritual.
But once it had reached the
end of its functional life,
the building was finally sealed
and Pacal lay to rest inside.
That Pacal was a high
initiate of the esoteric arts
is revealed in the iconography
of the sarcophagus lid in which
he is depicted in fetal position
on the trunk of the world tree.
Below him are the roots and
creative forces of nature,
above, the fruit of the tree
and the branches holding up
the Milky Way.
The keepers of the
sacred books are
portrayed along the edges,
along with astronomical data.
From beyond the grave,
Pacal whispers to us
how he led the life
of the true adept
and became a mediator
between the two worlds.
Pacal's son K'an Bahlam
followed his father's tradition
by erecting a set of three
graceful temples east
of the river, replicating
the establishment
of celestial order by
the creator God Ahau.
Each building
features elaborately
carved reliefs depicting father
and son standing east and west
of the axis of heaven
and earth, represented
by a cross, the tree of life.
Real and mythical
history is recorded along
with instructional paths
into Xibalba used by the king
to bring back gifts of life
and prosperity to his people.
At the temple of
the cross, a god
guides K'an Bahlam
out of Xibalba
and back to the physical world.
The king has become a
physical manifestation
of the axis of heaven,
emphasizing his role
as the source of magical power.
He was not just a practitioner
of ritual connecting the two
worlds, he represented
the path itself,
what the Maya called the way.
In the third temple, Pacal hands
his son the scepter of power,
while the tree of
life rises from Orion,
the place of creation.
The scene demonstrates how the
rituals continued by the son
provide for the
rebirth of the father,
just as in Egypt,
Horus represents
a reborn Osiris who is himself
the earthly representation
of Orion.
Both father and son wear
the ritual white apron
worn by Egyptian pharaohs and
later adopted in Freemasonry.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Deeper into Guatemala lies
Mutul known to the Maya
as the place of prognostication,
a university reflecting
the architecture of the cosmos,
a ceremonial center where
ancient teachers captured
sounds from other realities.
Today it is known as Tikal.
Tikal is home to the
tallest Maya pyramid.
Seven steep levels take
you to a summit enclosure
with walls 40 feet thick.
Standing outside it
and facing the jungle,
the voices amplified from behind
and projected over the canopy
of trees in total violation
of the known laws of sound.
And no wonder, here the
architecture the sky
built one of the finest
examples of sacred architecture.
They are said to have come
from the stars and spoke
[NON-ENGLISH],, the
language of light.
Teachers such as K'inich
Muwaan, Chak Tok Ich'aak, and Ix
Kolo'mte made Tikal a temple
city that united science, art,
philosophy, and religion as one,
giving rise to its other title,
the place with
the sacred voices.
The Maya word for
pyramid is naku,
house of the god,
which also happens
to be the name of the Egyptian
gods, the Aku, the shining
ones.
Coincidentally, the angle
of slope of pyramid four
is the same angle used
in the interior passage
of the Great Pyramid of Giza.
The pyramid shape
acts like a needle,
collecting Earth's
telluric currents,
acupuncturing the ground
and the human body,
then linking with currents
flowing beyond the atmosphere
and into space.
Along with the understanding
of sacred geometry
and mathematics, such
buildings transmitted myths
explaining how the
universe works.
The symbolism confirmed
a divine order
juxtaposed on social structure.
Plazas and pyramids
replicated in symbolic form
the sacred language originally
designed by the gods.
Thus they were also places where
communication between people
and the gods took place.
The design of courtyards,
entrances, and stairways
spoke to the individual of
where they were allowed to go
and where they were not.
And this was taught
from childhood.
The most restricted ritual
temples and residences
are reflected in their names--
pib nah, the underground house,
konsul, the conjuring place,
and kun, the sacred seat.
While the historical
buildings of Tikal
date from around
1,300 1300 BC, they
stand upon layers of previous
structures thousands of years
older.
The Temple of the Jaguar
priest, for example,
faces Orion in 3100 BC.
The central court of Tikal
is the main gathering place.
It's a raised
platform representing
the mound of creation,
while a pyramid at each end
represents the
division of elements
and the elevation of life.
One represents
the feminine moon,
the other the masculine sun.
The two different heights
reflect the difference
between the solar
and lunar calendars.
The two are connected by up
to nine underground levels
beneath the courtyard.
There, initiates would learn
the mysterious teachings
before appearing like magic
at the top of either pyramid.
One underground chamber
features a bust of Itzamna,
along with a frieze telling
the story of the Itz
and how they escaped
their sinking
homeland in the Atlantic
Ocean and their arrival
in Central America.
As for the rest
of their story, it
remains protected
beneath a sea of jungle.
[MUSIC PLAYING]